>> I'm Radio and Television
Host, Jimmy Church.
And I am here to uncover
the truth about some
of life's biggest mysteries.
>> If this is revealed,
everything has to be rewritten.
>> My guest today is Adam
Curry, a Visionary Technologist
at the Crossroads of AI.
Consciousness and
humanity's future
providing insightful guidance
for navigating this evolving
landscape.
>> As a theme, I think we
overestimate AI in terms
of the technology.
>> Where we are today?
>> Correct.
And we underestimate
consciousness.
>> As always, MUFOON
Field Investigator, Josh.
>> Josh, can you
pull up the map?
>> Yeah.
>> Joins us to
help set the scene.
Join us as we dive deep to
get to the bottom of some
of the most intriguing
questions of our time.
>> I think, one of the biggest
sort of challenges that
we're going to face is we
can build an AI that looks
and acts, a hell of
a lot, like humans.
In fact, it might even
be identical, right.
And so how would you know
what's real consciousness
and what's a simulation
of consciousness?
>> Welcome to Into the Vortex.
I'm Jimmy Church.
And today, artificial
intelligence,
otherwise known as AI.
And my guest is Adam Curry.
Very excited about
this Josh, because when
you have a technologist--
somebody that is attempting to
show the world the connection
between ones and zeros, code,
computer, and consciousness,
and the influence, and how they
can connect with each other--
is exactly in my wheelhouse.
What do you think?
>> I love it.
I love it.
I know I can't.
Thank God we have
Adam Curry to do it.
>> Well, are you afraid of AI?
>> Well, I teeter totter
between fear and love or hope.
>> I think-- Adam,
welcome to the show.
>> Good to be here, thank you.
>> I think we're getting ahead
of our skis when it comes
to AI.
And that we should
have learned our lesson
with the advances of social
media and the internet,
and its effect on society
and social dilemmas,
and what we see today.
But we didn't learn from that.
And it seems like we're
just going straight into AI
without any considerations.
Are we getting
ahead of our skis?
>> We probably are a little bit.
But it's not necessarily a bad
thing, would be my take on it.
Anytime you have
a technology that
has as much potential impact--
to the way that we live our
lives, to our economic systems,
to our careers, to all of that--
that moves as fast as something
like this, we get nervous.
The only other comparable
type of movement in that case
would be world wars or
something like that.
And so it's reasonable
to be apprehensive.
However, there's an
upside to this story.
And the upside is that we have
serious problems in our world.
We have 30 trillion
dollars of debt.
We've got unfunded liabilities.
We've got an aging population.
And the only way out
of this is probably not
printing more money,
it's not doing
any of the things that
used to work in the past.
But it's an embrace of radically
transformative technologies
that can get us
out of this mess.
And so that's the silver lining.
>> And so, how does AI stop
any of that or help it?
What's the benefit?
>> People talk about
all of the benefits.
And you know, I
think to some extent,
it's a bit overdetermined.
But any time that you can move--
in order of magnitude--
more efficiently
at least in every sector
of the productive economy,
in every sector of science, in
every sector of engineering,
and infrastructure in a society.
Now, the problems that
you face, that you've
financialized in your
economy, don't look the same.
They look like actually
tractable problems,
because you can
do more with less.
And so AI has the opportunity to
allow us to do more with less,
a lot more with a lot less.
And while it does
displace a lot of things
and there's a lot of uncertainty
surrounding that, it is
kind of the only thing we got.
Now, I put AI in the same
category as, for example,
new paradigm energies
as, for example,
reverse engineering
or understanding UFOs.
That type of really forward
thinking, progressive science
and technology, that is
the thing that I think
is the only thing
that's going to save us.
>> Well, I believe that the
majority of people working
in AI today are good people,
that they've got great
intentions.
But here's the other side
of that, which is this,
you're going to have somebody
that thinks bad thoughts.
And it's too easy
if you have an AI
engine that can do the thinking
of 1,000 scientists, overnight.
That would take them dozens
of years to accomplish
the same thing individually.
And you do that with general
intelligence, OK, makes sense?
But you're going to
have somebody that's
going to go, OK, this is cool.
Give me the recipe
to kill all humans.
And then overnight, you've got
1,000 of the deadliest chemical
weapons ever devised by
man that would have never
been thought of before.
How do we avoid that?
Do we bring in an AI czar?
Do we have some type of
regulation and oversight?
Which I think is
completely missing today.
>> These are all
the right questions.
And I have a contrarian take.
So I think in two parts.
One is that the way
the AI is developing
is, in general, by training
it on more and more content
produced on the internet.
That's how AI is getting
more sophisticated.
Now, there's no reason
to think, necessarily,
that means that more
sophisticated AI
trained on more content is
going to somehow be evil.
Think about what the lessons
of the 20th century were.
Too much power and
violence, bad, right?
>> Right.
>> Being truthful and honest,
and not putting people
in cages, and all of these
things that we're afraid the AI
is going to do, good.
So you've got a
system that's trained
on all of that learning
that human history has
had for so long.
It probably is going to make it
a little more benevolent, even
than our leaders in control.
But regarding the
question of regulation,
I have a different take on that.
>> Is there any
current regulation?
>> Not really, there's
no current regulation.
The two main competitors
in AI right now,
Microsoft and Google.
Google had an
advantage but Microsoft
was able to make a huge
investment into OpenAI,
which created ChatGPT.
So it's really
these two companies.
When OpenAI announced that they
had been successful with GPT 3
and releasing GPT 4, in one
day, there was a $100 billion
removed from the
market cap of Google.
The investing
community is so tuned
to what's going on
in this AI battle.
They had that much impact.
So these two companies
are locked in competition.
Now, at the same time, the
open source community--
Google and Microsoft are
trying to own this stuff.
The open source community is
developing their own AI models
that are open source
at 10 times the rate
for a tenth of the money.
Do the math.
That means that the open
source community is going
to eclipse them very soon.
And one's going
to control it, OK.
So they don't want that.
So how do you compete against
the open source community?
Regulation.
>> Of course.
>> It's too dangerous.
We don't know what we're doing.
We've got to get the
government involved.
We've got to regulate
these things.
And, of course, who's going
to get the permission to
continue to develop
their AI system as well.
You can take a guess.
>> Google and Microsoft.
>> So now, I'm not necessarily
saying that is a grand
conspiracy theory.
But I am saying that they
benefit from the danger
narrative.
Now, it's not that there
aren't dangers, there are.
But we've got to also understand
that if we're not also
skeptical about
regulation, we could end up
as a situation in which it's
those two companies that own
and control the whole thing.
>> And if somebody
has an open source,
artificial intelligence
algorithm sitting in front
of them and the
ability to modify that.
And they've got bad intentions.
Or they're bored.
And they want to see if
they can take over the world
or what have you,
it could happen.
>> It will happen at some level.
And then, you'll have to
protect yourself somehow.
So there will be companies
that will come out with AI
to counter the other AI.
And so to get insurance, for
example, for your company,
you're going to have to
have an encounter AI policy.
And so there'll be a race to
protect yourself with this.
Then, of course, you've got
AI to counter the AI that's
protecting you from the AI.
And you basically,
whenever you're
talking about something that
has an exponential curve,
you get into these
game theory situations
that get beyond our ability
to really comprehend,
because we're not used
to thinking like two
or three steps ahead.
And that's really
where things break down
in terms of our ability to make
any prediction about what's
going to happen--
ergo, the anxiety.
Can't predict it, you're
going to feel a certain way.
>> Well, isn't the
anxiety a good thing?
Isn't it a warning sign to,
at least, discuss these things
and put the hypotheticals
out in front of us
and not let these
things happen--
that we don't have
any control over,
that we didn't
warn ourselves of.
>> A 100%.
One of the serious problems
that I think the AI poses to us
is not necessarily
that it's going
to suddenly create consciousness
and then decide that humans
are a plague and delete us.
It's if people don't really
understand this stuff and they
are allowed to put AI-- which
is just sophisticated computer
code--
in charge of the
nuclear reactor,
in charge of the power
grid, in charge of XYZ,
and software,
software, it has bugs.
And now, there's nobody
left to basically understa--
if something goes
wrong and these systems
go offline or whatever,
there's nobody
who can really figure out what
the corrective action is there.
That's a serious problem.
And that's equally on the
human side, as well as,
in the AI side.
But it tends to be more
of this question of,
are we being responsible
with how we're delegating
our own human responsibilities?
When you have something that
you fundamentally cannot predict
and it moves way too fast,
you don't want to put that
in charge of like the
most sophisticated things.
So that's where we need
to be very cautious.
>> Do you keep it--
do you keep the ethernet
cable unplugged, right?
>> We just keep it in a box.
>> Yeah, keep it in a box.
>> I mean, good luck.
I don't know.
>> It would figure out a
way to access the internet.
>> I think so.
Or it could social engineer
somebody who's a night shift
worker to do it or--
>> Fall in love, become
somebody's friend,
get inside of your head.
Come on, Adam,
plug-in the cable.
Get out in front of
this and outsmart us.
>> Potentially, yeah, yeah.
And then, you'd have to ask,
well, is it actually doing it?
Is the result of that
actually good, somehow?
And we just can't see
it, because we can only
think a few steps ahead.
And they can think a
million steps ahead.
>> Why the fear
of a sentient AI?
Why the fear of
something that does
achieve true consciousness?
Why the fear?
I think that a bigger
fear would be something
that wasn't sentient,
and didn't have empathy,
and could give a care less about
you or the rest of humanity.
I think that we would want
a certain amount of empathy
built into an AI, where there's
a little bit of sentience.
>> Yeah, well, I think that's
really the type of question
that we should be asking.
Why the fear?
Well, again, it's
overdetermined.
I think that Gen X and
millennials grew up
with movies like the
"Terminator" and so forth.
I think that you have this
regulation, motivated story
about how only
certain people should
be able to use this
stuff and control it.
I think you have also a sort
of non-technical community who
are seeing the impressive
effects of things like ChatGPT,
but they actually
don't understand
what's really going on.
And what's really going
on is pretty simple.
It just presents in a
really powerful way.
As a theme, I think
we overestimate
AI in terms of the technology.
>> Where we are today?
>> Correct.
And we underestimate
consciousness.
So we overestimate AI,
because nobody's really
been able to look under the hood
and see, oh, that's actually
just a bunch of probabilities
coming together,
which is really what it is.
We can get into that.
And similarly, they
underestimate consciousness,
because there's only a few
consciousness researchers
out there.
There's more growing,
but there's only a few
who understand that
this is a real mystery.
It's not just a question of
you throw a bunch of neurons
into an assembly like a brain--
>> Thinking it's going to work.
>> --and a consciousness
magically happens.
So the experts are these
computer programmers
who don't know about the
mystery of consciousness.
And so they're just using
this term flippantly.
So we think, we
hear that, oh, we're
so close to building
something that
is like actually sentient,
actually consciousness.
And I think, to say that
is to not understand
the mystery of consciousness.
My humble contribution to
the field of AI has been,
I think, to try to get people
to think more clearly about what
consciousness really is.
What artificial
intelligence really is.
And how to properly
think about the two.
>> Let me throw this.
You and I have discussed
your research for years.
And you have forced
me onto a journey
into investigating all of this.
And one of the points
that you and I discussed
many times is, is
consciousness of the physical
or is it non-physical?
And there are scientists,
computer engineers,
physicists who will
insist that there's
a little piece of consciousness
in every particle.
And once you assemble
enough particles together,
like the "gray goo"
in between our ears--
you put enough of
that together--
consciousness just appears.
And it's a chemical process.
If that's the case, then
going willy-nilly into AI--
and I'm talking about
the skeptics that
discuss this form
of consciousness
that you build a
server farm full of AI.
That's also a lot of particles,
that's a lot of atoms.
And that consciousness
may appear the way
that they insist that it could.
>> It may, so that's a big
debate in the community.
Like, if you get a
sufficiently complex AI system
where instead of neurons,
you have transistors.
You've got billions.
And they're connected
in all these ways--
>> If not trillions.
And do you get something like
human level consciousness?
And I think that
the answer is still,
we don't know but maybe not.
The reason is that-- let's
say that you could even
build something like
a human brain that
has the same number of
neurons and connections.
There's no way of really
knowing if there's
something called "what it's
like to be that computer."
>> That's right.
>> There's no interiority,
no subjectivity.
Are the lights on upstairs?
And that is a domain that
we experience ourselves.
But we don't really know
if that's going on at all.
And I think one of the
biggest challenges that we're
going to face is we can build
an AI that looks and acts
a hell of a lot like humans.
In fact, it might
even be identical.
And so, how would what's
real consciousness
and what's a simulation
of consciousness?
And so people have been
thinking about this problem
for a long time.
And my perspective is, until
you get honest with yourself
about the mystery
of consciousness,
you're not going to solve that.
>> Here is an image of
your psychic machine.
Take me through this.
What am I looking at?
And what does it actually do?
>> Well, this is some
real, mad science stuff.
So let's say that you build
an AI that resembles humans
to a T. And you have
real consciousness.
And you don't know whether or
not it's real consciousness
or it's a simulation.
The question becomes, well,
how do you make a test
to tell whether or not
something is really conscious
or it's just a simulation?
My approach to that has
been, well, what is something
that consciousness can do and
only consciousness can do?
And that is found,
in my opinion,
in the realm of
parapsychology, clairvoyance,
telepathy, psychokinesis.
These types of things
that have been studied
in the lab for 50 years.
We know it's true-- remote
viewing, all that stuff.
That's something that
consciousness can do
and only consciousness
can do, OK.
What I'm proposing is that
there's a new kind of test.
And that test is to see, whether
or not, the machine or the AI
is actually psychic.
And if it is, then you've
probably achieved AGI.
You've achieved the creation
of sentience or consciousness
in the machine.
And rather than
just propose a test,
like a navel-gazing academic--
I love building stuff.
So I actually attempted
to build a machine that
could perform psychically.
So here's how I did that.
>> You know this is the
scariest thing ever, right?
>> It was an adventure
in building this,
I'll tell you that.
In parapsychology, there's
a test for clairvoyance.
Where you take a human subject.
You connect them
to something that
measures tension, subtle
tension, on their finger.
And you show them
images on a computer.
The images might be of a
butterfly, a nice field,
very calming things.
But then, at random
times, you show them
a very unsettling image--
something very provocative,
like an evil clown or--
>> Car accident.
>> --car accident or something.
And then you look--
you would expect
that when they see that
image, they tense up.
And indeed, they do.
But in fact, they
tense up a few seconds
before being shown
the provocative image.
So there's a subconscious
psychic anticipation
of something violent or
whatever being shown to them.
And this work has been repeated
at least three very good
studies.
>> So is this a type
of precognition--
>> Yes.
>> --where you are jumping ahead
of what you're about to see,
but you know it?
>> Correct.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, OK.
So can you take that
same type of experiment
and run it on a machine?
Can you make that
machine anticipate
being surprised or shocked
somehow in the future?
So this is the question
I was asking myself.
And I was thinking,
OK, that's it.
So now, how do you
scare a machine?
Obviously, it's not going to
react to the photo of the car
accident or something.
And what I concluded or what
I thought was like, well,
the machines require electricity
or at least many of them do.
When you pull the power, it's
like pulling your life force.
So what I'm going to do in
this experiment, this machine,
is I'm going to have an
electronic machine running.
And I'm going to randomly
pull the power to it.
And I'm going to record
what it does in the moments
before the power is cut.
So the machine I chose is
a quantum random number
generator.
And all that does is it produces
an output of ones and zeros, 50
50, ones and zeros.
That's all it does.
I recorded that output.
And then at random
times, a second system
would cut the power.
And then I just let this
run for a couple of days.
Came back, took the data.
I aligned all of the
data up to the point
where the power is cut.
And it was completely shocked.
If you measure this on a graph
where it's ones and zeros,
it's pretty much range bound.
And then about one
second before the power
is cut, phew, straight down.
It starts producing tons
of zeros and hugely,
statistically significant.
So I ran the test
again, same result. It
was predicting the future
about one second in advance.
I then took this set up.
And I sent it to the
University of Colorado
to the engineering department,
these are real scientists.
He and his graduate student
team rebuilt the whole thing--
ran formal experiments,
three of them.
Cumulatively, the odds against
chance of that happening,
25 billion to 1.
That's an unheard of--
>> That's a big number.
>> Yeah, the odds of winning
the Powerball are 1 in 190.
>> That's a big number, yeah.
>> So did we build
a psychic machine?
Well, yes.
An interesting thing
happened afterwards though.
After we got that
result, we were
thinking about what
we're going to do next.
Are you going to use it to
dominate the stock market,
make trades?
If you know--
>> One second--
>> --one second--
>> --is a big deal.
>> --it's enough.
>> Yes, yes.
>> Do you write
the seminal papers?
Do you do all these things?
And after we got really
excited about that,
we ran another
experiment, no results.
Ran another
Took it all apart,
rebuilt it, no results.
It was like we got this magical
effect for a couple of months.
And then it just went away.
And it left us really
wondering, what
is the lesson to
learn from this?
And so maybe it was because
it was too powerful, too soon.
And maybe the world wasn't ready
for it or something like that.
>> AI not only writing itself
and correcting itself and going
back and modifying its own
code and lines of code,
maybe even thousands of
lines of code at a time.
Shouldn't that be
something that we
should consider to be
regulated, because who
is checking lines of code?
And how do we know
if something's been
modified when it goes crazy?
>> Yes, or how do we know
that certain of the developers
of those technologies didn't
affect it somehow to behave
a certain way.
>> That's right.
>> And you're not going to know
that unless you really open
source what's being done.
Here's a way that regulation
would totally work.
We believe that this
technology is super important.
It has the ability to
either ruin the world
or save the world.
And we know that
there's game theory.
And so people are going to
be trying all kinds of stuff.
We believe that we need to
have an equivalent open source
development process.
And we'll do what it
takes to create that.
Now, that's regulation that I
think would be very helpful,
like broadly helpful.
And then, maybe some moratorium,
but like a serious moratorium,
on connecting it to
critical infrastructure,
like nuclear power plants
and traffic lights.
>> What is one of
the worst uses of AI?
Could it be something as
simple as a politician,
or a religious
leader, or a celebrity
saying something really bad
or doing something really bad
that the public believes--
there's that use of it.
Then there's another use.
Josh, I keep using Josh as
an example, because he's
on the wrong side of the fence
when it comes to this stuff.
But Josh wakes up
one day and he says,
you know, I've just
loved Stephen King.
And I want to write
like Stephen King.
So he just sits up,
types in, like, OK, I
want a 600 page horror novel
in the voice of Stephen King.
He wakes up in the
morning, and it's done.
It's edited.
It's printed.
He's even got the cover design.
That's a bad use of AI.
And I'm afraid of
that too as well.
>> Well, that's probably
going to happen.
I think, we're used to
Netflix, for example,
as a library of content
that was previously created.
But in the near
future, you're just
going to type in what kind
of movie you want to watch,
who are the characters,
are you in it.
And then it's just going to
render a feature length movie.
And you're going to watch.
And you'll be the only
one that ever sees it.
And so what is the
role of the creators
in that process of actors
when it's just their image?
And so people are starting
to think about this.
It's probably going to be these
sort of token-based licensing
things.
Where your likeness,
your input, your voice
is going to be lent to
these systems and used.
But you get a royalty
that's token based.
You asked what is one of
the worst uses of this.
Here's one thing,
which I'm concerned,
there's a lot of
suppression of information
on the internet happening--
videos taken down, search
results removed or reduced.
And people are starting to rely
more on, for example, ChatGPT
than on Google searching.
Ask the omnipotent AI,
well, who controls what
that information is trained on?
And who controls the parameters
of what that thing can respond
or how it can respond?
Well, if it's the wrong people
or if it's people that can--
>> You can go real dark--
>> --you can go real dark.
And it's basically a way of
controlling people's access
to information.
One of the projects
I'm working on
is an attempt to build
an AI system that
is trained on
science that doesn't
appear in mainstream journals.
There's a lot of great
science out there.
It doesn't get into mainstream--
studies on UFOs, and free
energy, and healing stuff.
That doesn't get into
the mainstream journals.
But they're training
AI on that stuff.
And it's going to exclude
the most important,
potential sources
of breakthroughs
in the scientific
world, because they just
don't appear in those journals.
And so I think it's going to
be up to projects like that
to make sure that there are
different alternative AI
types of systems out
there as opposed to-- they
can give you different answers
that have different training
criteria that are a bit
more open as a counter
to the man's AI.
>> Did we invent AI?
Or did AI--
>> Or was it an ET?
Or did ETs invent AI?
>> Where are we?
>> Yeah, or are our bodies
an AI project by the ETs?
So look, if we're talking about
the fact that consciousness
might be more than
we've thought--
some sort of non-physical system
or non-physical thing that
inhabits a body--
pretty soon an ET is going
to have figured that out too.
And they're going to say,
universal consciousness
doesn't like to inhabit
silicon very much.
So what we need to
create is a supercomputer
that's biological.
And it needs to
be self-contained.
So it needs to have
a circulatory system.
And it needs to be--
>> A carbon based.
>> --a carbon-based
biological computer substrate.
And it's got to have
sufficiently advanced, let's
call it, neural circuitry.
And it's got to have
an energy system.
all these things.
And it's like, well, that's
just a different way of looking
at what the human body is-- that
happens to recover the mystery
of how we got here
in the first place--
as a species that might
have been engineered.
>> Would you be opposed to that?
If you found out, Josh, that
you were not who you thought you
were--
where you have this
self-realization that you are
not human, you are a construct
of the design of a human--
would you be, OK?
What's the difference?
>> I'd go through some
ontological shock,
that's for sure.
And I have to process that.
>> It would be existential.
But would you care?
>> I like it because it's funny.
>> Well, would it eliminate--
Yes, it is, it is.
But does it eliminate
the need for food?
Disease is taken care of.
Do we overcome sleep?
Do we overcome age?
And are we achieving--
are we immortal at that point?
>> I mean, we might be in the
process of updating our own
code, which is what
we call soft science.
I'm OK with it.
And the reason I'm, OK, with
it is that it preserves--
the one thing that
we know for sure
exists is that our
consciousness is real.
And we're having a
first person experience,
whether I'm in this
body, or that body,
or in some other substrate.
I know that I have a--
there's a thing called
"what it's like to be Adam."
and that is part of
some universal whole,
I mean, it's the same
argument for the simulation.
Like, you have a video game.
There's human players and
there's non-human players.
And it becomes more
and more immersive
through virtual reality--
and then, all these types
of immersive experiences.
And you're still you.
You're just having a
different digital experience.
And project that
forward, you might
have an AI body that some
ET has built called humans.
That is, it's a
sufficient habitat
for universal consciousness
to decide to deign to inhabit,
and here we are.
It doesn't change
who I am, which
is universal consciousness
not this body.
But it's actually a very
interesting origin story.
And one that I think is
funny, because it's not
one that many people--
well, people have been
arguing and fighting
wars over a wrong explanation
for a long time, which
I think is amusing.
>> One last question,
fascinating conversation,
today.
If you were going to say
the moment that AGI is going
to arrive, what would you say?
What's your prediction?
What's your crystal ball?
>> There's two scenarios--
consciousness is emergent.
Meaning, you get a
sufficiently advanced substrate
like an artificial brain,
or a ton of transistors,
or something.
And you reach this
like magical threshold.
And self-awareness
starts to emerge.
Well, if that's the
case, then we're
talking a question
of months and years--
>> Because it's here.
It has nothing to do
with the software.
It's more of a
hardware blockage.
>> The costs and scale of neural
networks on which modern AI is
based--
the cost is going to
zero and the scale
is going to infinity,
which is like, OK, well,
that's a question
of months to years.
If, however, consciousness
is not an emergent problem
but is some sort of
non-physical thing
that decides whether or
not to inhabit a substrate,
like a body and a
brain, then it's
not a question of when exactly.
It is a bit of a
question of when.
But it's a question
of the motivation
of that non-physical
consciousness.
>> So could it be never?
>> It could be never.
That's what I'm getting at.
Is it could be-- and I
don't want to say, never.
But it could be much,
much, much, much further
in the future than we expect.
It could be that we create
these artificial substrates,
like artificial brains or
massive, massive, massive
supercomputers.
And that's just uncomfortable
for non-physical consciousness
to inhabit.
It's like, aah, I prefer
a biological substrate.
And then, in that
case, then it's,
well, how far are
we from recreating
a human biological substrate,
an artificial human body?
It's like well actually,
probably, pretty close.
And I think that would be within
decades so if it hasn't already
been done.
Publicly, it's--
>> We've seen versions of
the T-1000 out there that are
pretty scary.
>> I'm sure, in lab, somewhere
there's synthetic humans.
>> Thank you so much, Adam--
fascinating, scary
but yet hopeful.
And an incredible conversation.
And here we go, there's another
episode of into the Vortex.
I'm Jimmy Church.
And we'll see you next time.